 _ __                 ______                         _ __
' )  )                  /                           ' )  )
 /--' __.  __  ,     --/ __  __.  _. o ____  _,      /  / _  , , , _
/  \_(_/|_/ (_/_    (_/ / (_(_/|_(__<_/ / <_(_)_    /  (_</_(_(_/_/_)_
             /                               /|
            '                               |/

                        "Light Makes Right"

                        October 27, 1989
                        Volume 2, Number 8

Compiled by Eric Haines, 3D/Eye Inc, 2359 Triphammer Rd, Ithaca, NY 14850
    NOTE ADDRESS CHANGE: wrath.cs.cornell.edu!eye!erich
    [distributed by Michael Cohen <m-cohen@cs.utah.edu>, but send
    contributions and subscriptions requests to Eric Haines]
All contents are US copyright (c) 1989 by the individual authors
Archive locations: anonymous FTP at cs.uoregon.edu (128.223.4.1) and at
		   freedom.graphics.cornell.edu (128.84.247.85), /pub/RTNews

Contents:
    Introduction
    Tracing Tricks, edited by Eric Haines

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduction

	I've decided to pass on an article published in the SIGGRAPH '89
"Introduction to Ray Tracing" course notes.  It's something of a "best of the
Ray Tracing News" compendium of ideas.  Since the notes are not easy for
everyone to access, and the article probably will not be printed elsewhere, I
thought it worthwhile to reprint here.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Tracing Tricks, edited by Eric Haines

Over the years I have learnt a variety of tricks to increase the performance
and image quality of my ray tracer.  It's almost a cliche that today's
successful trick is tomorrow's established technique.  Photorealistic computer
graphics is, after all, concerned with figuring out shortcuts and
approximations for rendering various physical phenomena, i.e. tricks.

For whatever reason, many of the tricks mentioned here are not common
knowledge.  Some have been published (and sometimes overlooked), some have
been discussed informally and have never made it into research papers, and
others seem to have appeared out of nowhere.  It's most likely that there are
tricks that are commonly known that have not percolated over to me yet.

When possible, I have tried to give appropriate references or attributions; if
not attributed, the ideas are my own (I think!).  My apologies if I have
overlooked anyone.  Only references that do not appear in the book's "Ray
Tracing Bibliography" are included at the end of this article.  For more
general rendering hacks, see [Whitted85], which originally inspired me to
attempt to pass on some ideas from my bag of tricks.


Ambient Light

One common trick (origins unknown) is to put a light at the eye to do better
ambient lighting.  Normally if a surface is lit by only ambient light, its
shading is pretty crummy.  For example, a non-reflective cube totally in
shadow will have all of its faces shaded the exact same shade.  All edges
disappear and the cube becomes a hexagonal blob.  The light at the eye gives
the cube definition.  Note that a light at the eye does not need shadow
testing:  wherever the eye can see, the light can see, and vice versa.
However, this trick can lead to various artifacts, e.g.  there will always be
a highlight near the center of every specular sphere in the image.


Efficiency Schemes

There are any number of efficiency schemes out there, including Bounding
Volume Hierarchy, Octree, Grid, and 5D Ray Classification.  See Jim Arvo's
section of the book for an excellent overview of all of these.  The most
important conclusion is that any efficiency scheme is better than none.  Even
on the simplest scenes an efficiency scheme will help execution.  For example,
in one test scene with only ten objects, using an efficiency scheme made the
job take only one third the time.  Grid subdivision is probably the quickest
to implement, though the others are not that much harder.

While at the University of Utah, John Peterson and Tom Malley actually
implemented Whitted/Rubin, Kay/Kajiya, and an octree scheme, and found that
all three schemes were within 10-20% of each other speedwise.  In an informal
survey at SIGGRAPH '88, the BV Hierarchy, Octree, Grid and 5D schemes all had
about the same number of users (all the 5D users were from Apollo; on the
other hand, 5D is the new kid on the block).

There are a number of techniques I have found to be generally useful for all
efficiency schemes.

1) When shadow testing, keep the opaque object (if any) which shadowed each
   light for each ray tree node.  Try this object immediately during the next
   shadow test at that ray tree node.  Odds are that whatever shadowed your
   last intersection point will shadow again.  If the object is hit you can
   immediately stop testing because the light is not seen.  This was first
   published in [Haines86].

2) When shadow testing, save transparent objects for later intersection.  Only
   if no opaque object is hit should the transparent objects be tested.  The
   idea here is to avoid doing work on transparent filters when in fact the
   light does not reach the surface.

3) Don't calculate the normal for each intersection.  Get the normal only
   after all intersection calculations are done and the closest object for
   each node is known.  After all, each ray can have only one intersection
   point and one normal.  Saving intermediate results is worthwhile for some
   intersection calculations, which are then used if the object is actually
   hit.  This idea was first mentioned in [Whitted85].  Similarly, other
   calculations about the surface can be delayed, such as (u,v) location, etc.

4) One other idea (which I have not tested) is sorting each intersection list
   by various criteria.  Most efficiency schemes have in common the idea of
   lists of objects to be tested.  For a given list, the order of testing is
   important.  For example, all else being equal, if a list contained a spline
   surface and a polygon, I would want to test the polygon first since it is
   usually a quicker intersection test.  Given an opaque object and a bounding
   box in a list, I probably want to test the opaque object first when doing
   shadow testing, since I want to find any intersection as soon as possible.
   If two polygons are on the list, I probably want to test the larger one
   first, as it is more likely to cast a shadow or give me a maximum depth
   (see next section).  There are many variations on this theme and at this
   point little work has been done on these possibilities.


Bounding Volume Hierarchy

I have a strong bias towards this scheme since it handles a wide variety of
object sizes, types, and orientations in a robust fashion.  Other schemes will
often be faster, but this scheme has the fewest crippling pathological cases
(e.g. a grid subdivision scheme is useless whenever most of the objects fall
into one grid box).  I favor the automatic bounding volume generation technique
described by [Goldsmith87].

I have found a number of tricks to speed up hierarchy traversal, most of which
are simple to implement. Some of the ideas can also be useful for other
efficiency schemes.

1) Keep track of the closest intersection distance.  Whenever an object is
   hit, keep its distance as the maximum distance to search.  During further
   intersection testing use this distance to cut short the intersection
   calculations:  if an object or bounding box is beyond the maximum distance,
   no further testing of it needs to be done.  Note that for shadow testing
   the distance to the light provides an initial maximum.

2) When building a ray intersection tree, keep the ray tree which was
   previously built.  For each ray tree node, intersect the object in the old
   ray tree, then proceed to intersect the bounding box/object tree.  By
   intersecting the old object first you can usually obtain a good maximum
   distance immediately, which can then be used to aid trick #1.

3) When shooting rays from a surface (e.g.  reflection, refraction, or shadow
   rays), get the initial list of objects to intersect from the bounding
   volume hierarchy.  For example, a ray beginning on a sphere must hit the
   sphere's bounding volume, so include all other objects in this bounding
   volume in the immediate test list.  The bounding volume which is the parent
   of the sphere's bounding volume must also automatically be hit, and its
   other children should automatically be added to the test list, and so on up
   the object tree.  Note also that this list can be calculated once for any
   object, and so could be created and kept around under a least-recently-used
   storage scheme.  Another advantage of this scheme is that nearby neighbors
   of the object are tested for shadowing first.  These neighbors are more
   likely to cast a shadow on the point than any random object.  I first saw
   this trick used in Weghorst and Hooper's ray tracer at Cornell's Program of
   Computer Graphics.

4) Similar to trick #3, the idea is simply to do the same list making process
   for the eye position.  Check if the eye position is inside the topmost node
   of the hierarchy.  If it is, check the children which are boxes.  Continue
   to check and unwrap until you are left with a list of objects to intersect.
   Again, the idea is to avoid wasting time shooting a ray against boxes which
   you know must be hit.

   For light sources, since the farthest endpoint of the ray is also known, it
   can also be used to open some boxes early on.  The tradeoff here, however,
   is that for shadow testing we want to find any intersection we can.
   Wasting time opening boxes near the light or ray origin might be better
   spent trying to find an intersection as fast as possible.

5) An improvement to trick #3 is also to use trick #4 to open more boxes
   initially.  You work up the hierarchy opening all parent boxes; any
   children of the parent (except the original one, of course) are then tested
   against the ray position.  However, this can be done only when the trick is
   done on the fly, since the ray's origin will change.

Kay & Kajiya's hierarchy scheme [Kay86] is about the best overall traversal
method.  However, Jeff Goldsmith and others note that if you do use Kay &
Kajiya's heapsort on bounding volumes in order to get the closest, don't
bother to do it for illumination rays.  In shadowing, you don't care about the
closest intersection, but just whether anything blocks the light.


Octree

There are a few tips on accessing and moving through the octree.  Olin Lathrop
and others have pointed out that there is a faster method than Glassner's
hashing scheme for finding which octree voxel contains a point.  Quickest is
to simply transform the point into the octree's (0,0,0) to (1,1,1) space.  Say
you allow your octree a maximum of eight levels.  This means you'll want to
convert from world coordinates to eight bits in X, Y, and Z.  For example, if
the octree box went from 3.0 to 6.0 along the X axis in world space, you would
convert 5.25 into the binary fraction 0.11000000 (which is equal to 0.75
decimal, which is where 5.25 lies between 3.0 and 6.0).  The most significant
bit of each binary fraction for each coordinate is then combined and used to
access the correct topmost octree voxel (i.e. 0 through 7, similar to
Glassners' scheme).  The next-most significant three bits are then stripped
off, and the corresponding subordinate octree voxel is accessed, on down until
a leaf voxel is found.

In practice, each octree voxel notes whether it is a parent of further voxels
or is a leaf and contains a list of objects to hit.  If it is a parent, it
stores a list of 8 pointers to its subordinate octrees, with null pointers
meaning that the subordinate octree is empty; otherwise, a list of objects is
used.

One problem with building octrees is deciding when enough is enough.  You want
to subdivide an octree voxel if the number of objects is too many, but you may
find that these further subdivisions do not gain you anything.  Olin Lathrop
has an interesting method for octree subdivision.  First, the biggest win is
to subdivide on the fly.  Never subdivide anything until you find there is a
demand for it (this same idea was used by Arvo and Kirk [Arvo87] in their 5D
efficiency scheme).  His subdivision criteria are, in order of precedence:

1) Do not subdivide if subdivision generation limit is hit.

2) Do not subdivide if a voxel contains less than X objects (These first two
   criteria were first proposed in [Glassner84]).  Olin uses X=1.

3) Do not subdivide if less than N rays passed through this voxel, but did not
   hit anything.  Olin uses N=4.

4) Do not subdivide if M*K >= N, where M is the number of rays that passed
   through this voxel that did hit something, and K is a parameter you chose.
   Olin uses K=2, but suspects it should be higher.  This step seeks to avoid
   subdividing a voxel that may be large, but has a good history of producing
   real intersections anyway.  Keep in mind that for every ray that did hit
   something, there are probably shadow test rays that did not hit anything.
   This can distort the statistics, and make a voxel appear less "tight" than
   it really is, hence the need for larger values of K.

Another possible criterion is to base the subdivision generation limit
(criterion 1) on the number of objects in the octree.  If you had, say, 6
objects and 5 of them are clustered tightly together, you may find your octree
reaching its maximum depth without the subordinate octrees actually splitting
up the 5 objects.  These octree voxels are useless, costing extra time and
memory.  They could be avoid by setting the limit based on the total number of
objects.  I use something along the lines of the depth limit being equal to
log sub 4 of (number of objects).

Andrew Glassner has a better method to avoid this problem.  When you subdivide
a voxel, look at its children.  If only one child is non-empty, replace the
original voxel with its non-null child.  Do this recursively until the
subdivision criterion is satisfied.  He does this in his spacetime ray tracer,
and the speedup can be large.  Note that this scheme means adding a field to
the octree structure to identify what level in the hierarchy it represents.

An idea to speed octree traversal was first mentioned to me by Andrew Glassner
and later by Mike Kaplan.  The idea is to place a pointer on each face of each
octree voxel.  If a voxel's face is next to a larger or same size voxel, a
pointer to this neighbor is stored.  If the voxel face's neighbors are
smaller, then the face pointer is set to point at the bordering voxel of the
same size (which is these neighbors' common parent).  If there are no
neighbors (i.e. the face is on the exterior), a null pointer is stored.

When a ray exits a voxel, the voxel face is accessed and the next voxel found
directly.  This voxel may have to be descended, but this trick saves having to
descend the octree from the top.

Mike Kaplan independently arrived at a similar method, in which he stores
quadtrees at the faces so that he can immediately access the next voxel and
avoid any descent altogether.


Bounding Box Intersection

The fastest method in general is Kay and Kajiya's slab intersection method
[Kay86].  As they point out, precompute as much as you can for the ray, i.e.
check whether the ray is parallel to any of the axes, and for whichever axes
it is not, computing the multiplicative inverse of the ray direction vector.
However, there are other tests which can actually improve the performance of
the box intersector.  For example, I have found that for my particular ray
tracer, if we first do a quick inside-outside test with the ray origin and the
box, the overall box intersection time goes down (for a related trick, which
is something of a preprocess version of this method, see #4 under "Bounding
Volume Hierarchy").


Spline Surface Intersection

There are three camps on this question:  the numerical analysts, the polygon
meshers, and the synthesists (who do a little of each).  The following
comments are distilled from John Peterson's thoughts on the subject.  The
analytic methods are often slow, and there are many nightmares involved in
finding roots of two equations (see section 9.6 of [Press86]).  To find the
quadrilaterals, John recommends subdividing the surfaces by using the Oslo
Algorithm, due to its generality [Bartels87, Sweeney86].  Easiest to implement
is simply subdividing the surface by a given step size, then ray tracing the
mesh of polygons produced (throwing these polygons into an octree or grid
efficiency scheme is recommended).  Another method is to use adaptive
subdivision with a quadtree structure, checking a flatness criteria to see
whether a given quadrilateral should be subdivided into four
sub-quadrilaterals.

Peterson's subdivision criterion is to use a bounding box around each quad
generated, subdividing until the box is smaller than a certain number of
pixels.  A drawback of this method is that it does not elegantly handle
objects that are part of the scene yet do not appear in the viewing frustum
(e.g.  if the teapot is only seen in a mirror, we cannot get a good sense of
how much to subdivide it).  Snyder and Barr [Snyder87] have some good
recommendations on this process, and they use the change in the tangent vector
between the quad's points as a subdivision criterion.  This article also
points out other pitfalls of tessellation and of rendering polygons with a
normal at each vertex.

If adaptive techniques are used, one problem to guard against is cracking.
Say there are two adjacent quadrilaterals, and one has been subdivided into
four smaller quads.  Something must be done along the seam between the two
large quadrilaterals, as normally the subdivision point between the two common
vertices will not lie on the large, undivided quad.  If rendered from some
angle, there will be a noticeable crack between the large quad and the two
neighboring smaller quads.


Acknowledgements

This article owes a large debt to Andrew Glassner, who began "The Ray Tracing
News," an informal journal for ray tracing researchers to share ideas.  He has
kept the hardcopy version moving along, while I have had the pleasure of
running the electronic edition.  Most of the ideas given a personal
attribution in this article are from contributions to the "News", and I thank
all those who have contributed to it over the years.  Finally, my thanks to
Kells Elmquist and Andrew Glassner for their comments on this paper.


Bibliography

[Bartels87] Bartels, Richard H., John C.  Beatty, Brian A.  Barsky, An
Introduction to Splines for Use in Computer Graphics, Morgan Kaufmann, Los
Altos, California, 1987.

[Press88] Press, William H.  et al, Numerical Recipes in C, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1988.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
END OF RTNEWS
