 _ __                 ______                         _ __
' )  )                  /                           ' )  )
 /--' __.  __  ,     --/ __  __.  _. o ____  _,      /  / _  , , , _
/  \_(_/|_/ (_/_    (_/ / (_(_/|_(__<_/ / <_(_)_    /  (_</_(_(_/_/_)_
             /                               /|
            '                               |/

                        "Light Makes Right"

                         January 24, 1996
                        Volume 9, Number 2

Compiled by Eric Haines, 3D/EYE Inc, 1050 Craft Road, Ithaca, NY 14850
	erich@acm.org; opinions expressed are mine, not 3D/EYE's
All contents are copyright (c) 1995, 1996, all rights reserved by the
	individual authors (whoever they are)
Archive locations:  anonymous FTP at
	ftp://ftp-graphics.stanford.edu/pub/Graphics/RTNews/,
	ftp://wuarchive.wustl.edu/graphics/graphics/ray/RTNews/,
	ftp://ftp.povray.org/pub/povray/Ray-Tracing-News/, and many others.
	HTML http://www.povray.org/rtn/index.html,
	HTML http://wuarchive.wustl.edu/graphics/graphics/ray/RTNews/html/ and
	HTML ftp://ftp-graphics.stanford.edu/pub/Graphics/RTNews/html/index.html

Contents:
    Introduction
    Advice to Authors, by Anonymae

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduction

This is a special edition of the Ray Tracing News.  It contains no information
on ray tracing or rendering.  If you may someday be an author, it contains
information potentially worth hundreds or thousands of dollars (hopefully in
your favor ;-> ).  More important, it gives you some sense of what the
publishing process is like.  If you know of some of the pitfalls and headaches
in advance you are better prepared to produce your work without any unpleasant
surprises.

A friend asked the going rate for author's royalties on a technical or trade
paperback, so I asked some people what they received.  A few wrote back with
extremely enlightening and fascinating comments.  I passed these notes on to
other authors, and received yet more interesting reading back.  I have now
edited all these comments down a bit, mostly taking out the names of authors
and publishers and removing publisher-specific comments.  I have also avoided
commenting on any text, even that which disagrees with commonly held views.  I
hope this compendium is as educational and eye opening to you as it was to me.
Thanks again to all who contributed.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Advice to Authors, by Anonymae

I would advise any writer seeking a book contract to contact the National
Writers' Union or the American Society of Journalists and Authors and get
someone to help with the contract negotiations (Both organizations have
offices in New York, ASJA is at http://www.eskimo.com/~brucem/asja.htm and the
NWU has an online forum in the Writers' Forum on America Online and is at
http://www.igc.apc.org/nwu/index.html).  NWU has an entire group of volunteers
ready to help writers with contracts - book, magazine, electronic rights, etc.
The ASJA can offer similar help.  Yes, you will have to join, but compared to
the money you're about to make, the membership is trivial.  And
tax-deductible.  I used a lawyer, because at that time these advisory groups
were not in place.  Next time, I will use them.

NEVER EVER sign the first contract you get.  This goes for magazine articles,
CD-ROMs, books, and anything else you care to mention.  The first contract you
see will be tilted totally in favor of the organization which wrote it.  Don't
be afraid to ask questions, cross things out, and tell people that you won't
do...whatever.  Royalties are tricky; get somebody from NWU or ASJA to explain
them to you.  Remember that whoever gets something down on paper first
controls the agenda; since this is ALWAYS the publisher, don't be afraid to
bring up things that aren't in the contract if you want them.  It never hurts
to ask and you can always say no to something you don't want.  Don't be afraid
to add things to the contract.  Don't worry when the editor says, "But nobody
has ever asked for that before!"  So what, big deal, and who cares.  The
secret is:  EVERY author who asks for that is the first, even if 10,000
authors asked for it before you.

I didn't understand all that was involved in writing a book with lots of
graphics in it.  I didn't get any expense money for long-distance calls, nor
did I think ahead to realize that maybe the artists might want money too (I
was fortunate in that artists contributed freely to my book.  But I felt bad
about not being able to pay them even a token amount).  I didn't even think
about indexing until I realized that the book was going to need an index and I
better create one.  Indexing, to put it bluntly, is a bitch.  Unless you are
the kind of person who really enjoys minutiae, figure out a way to hire
somebody to do it for you.  Another thing to keep in mind is that all your
relatives and friends and everybody you interview and everybody who
contributes images will ask for a free copy of the book.  Figure out a way to
deal with this before it happens or you could have some awkward - and
potentially expensive - moments.  In my opinion, artists who contribute images
to a book do deserve a free copy, especially if you can't pay them in filthy
lucre.  So plan for that up front.  Something else to consider is that, unless
you are the world's expert on a topic, you are going to want content expert
reviewers to look over your work and point out errors.  You'd better figure
out how you're going to say thanks to them, too...just an acknowledgment, a
lifetime membership at President and First Lady, a free book?  Whatever it is,
figure it out early...before you've spent the advance.  Even better, do it
before the contract is signed - a good time to ask for those extra free books
you'll need.

For first-time book writers:  writing a book is hard work.  Start as soon as
your contract is signed and work like hell until it is finished.  Otherwise
you will wind up begging your editor for extra time.  This is embarrassing at
best.  At worst, you could lost part of your advance.

Finally, once your contract is signed, no matter what squabbling went on
beforehand, the editor and publisher are now your best buddies.  You are all
in the same boat, all rowing to the same destination:  a successful book.  So
once your signature is dry, treat the editor as your friend.  If you have a
problem of any kind relating to the book, tell the editor immediately.  Don't
wait until the last minute; if advised early, the editor may be able to help
and can possibly do some re-scheduling.  If the editor has a request, answer
it or explain immediately why you can't.  And if you need help, ask for it.
The editor may not be able to help, but he sure can't if you don't ask.

----

Authors should consider that a book is more than just the words.  It includes
the front cover, back cover, images, diagrams, page layout, chapter pages,
table of contents, index, and so forth.  All of these require creative thought
and take money and time to put together.  If you have specific creative ideas
for any of these, then you should make sure your contract gives you the
necessary control.

As an example, in our book we failed to include creative control clauses in
the contract.  The cover was designed and printed in a catalog before we had
ever seen it.  In fact, it was only after the book had gone to press that we
finally saw the cover.  By luck, it wasn't bad, but we wish we'd had control.

In the same book, the color pages turned into a nightmare.  We wanted a
particular set of images.  The publisher didn't like the esthetics of the
images.  Since the book was a textbook, and the images explanatory in nature,
not necessarily artistic, we felt the publisher was inappropriately editing
our visual content.  One set of images the publisher disliked illustrated
issues in the use of color in shading.  Obviously such images must be printed
in color.  We lost.  The images were dropped from the book or only printed in
black and white.  We are still furious, but without explicit control clauses
in the contract, we had no power.

Regarding text, we recommend that the text you deliver be as edited by you as
possible.  Don't count on the publisher doing a super editing pass to pick up
all your little mistakes.  They'll catch grammar problems, but generally not
catch tone problems, pacing problems, incorrect figure references, wrong
numeric values in equations or sample code, and so forth.  Don't assume it'll
get fixed by them.  Do it yourself.  Despite our best efforts, our book
includes embarrassing mistakes for which we only have ourselves to blame.

Also regarding text, make sure you know the practical page limits imposed by
the publisher.  Such page limits arise from binding types, printing costs, and
appropriate retail price.  During writing of our book, our editor kept telling
us to take as much space as we needed.  So we did, and wrote 1000+ manuscript
pages, which sift down to about 800+ formatted book pages.  After turning in
the manuscript, we were informed that 670 printed pages was the top they'd
allow and we had to cut 150 pages from the book.  It was very painful.  If
we'd understood the limits up front, we could have designed for them and saved
a lot of wasted writing and editing time.

Another word of advice is to deliver your manuscript on time.  While schedules
always include slack, if you miss a deadline your publisher gains the upper
hand.  They can cancel your contract (which they won't), but more importantly
they now have a built-in excuse for not doing additional work you request.
They'll say "We'd like to do that edit pass, but since you were late in
delivering the manuscript, we're behind the schedule and in danger of missing
the release date."  If you deliver on time, you are in a better position to
ask for additional work.

When choosing a publisher, we went to the experts:  the book retailers.  We
traveled to a number of stores and asked their managers and book buyers what
publishers they liked and why.  We discovered that some publishers do a bad
job of marketing, others are unsupportive of their retailers, and still others
have a reputation of producing poor books.  It doesn't matter how good your
book is, if nobody knows about it or retailers are biased against your
publisher, you're in a bad spot.  We chose our publisher by picking one with a
good reputation among retailers.

It's also important to note which publishers sell in to the stores where you
want your book to be.  Low end consumer publishers won't have many books at
university book stores.  High end publishers of professional texts won't have
many books in neighborhood mall book stores.  We chose a publisher whose books
consistently showed up in the appropriate stores.

In our travels we also learned a bit about what makes a book sell.  Here are
the basics:  (1) it must be thick, (2) it must have a colorful spine, (3) it
must have lots of diagrams and examples (if it's a how-to book).  To catch the
customer's eye, your book must be easy to spot.  To help this, you want the
retailer to "face out" your book:  to turn it so that the cover faces the
aisle instead of the spine.  This is only possible if your book is thick
enough to stand on its own.  Thickness is also a psychological cue to the
customer that convinces them that the book is complete and, therefore, the
only book they need to buy.  A quick thumb through the pages of your book
should show lots of examples and images so that the customer is further
convinced your book is the definitive, helpful work on the topic.

Things that make a book not sell:  spiral bindings and shrink-wrapped extras.
Spiral bindings don't show the name of your book when the book is not faced
out.  Without a visible and colorful spine label, customers don't see your
product.  When books have shrink-wrapped extras, such as cheat cards, the
shrink-wrapping prevents customers from thumbing through your book.  The
wrapping also often breaks, which causes the retailer to take the incomplete
book off the shelves, and again the customer doesn't see your product.  In our
case, even though we wanted a textbook with a binding that would let it lay
flat, and we wanted a cheat card, we chose to use a standard binding and omit
the cheat card so that the book would sell better.

To sum up our experiences, we advise authors to learn as much about the
publishing business as possible before writing a book or signing a contract.
The more you know, the better you are able to insure the right things are in
your contract and the wrong things are not.  You are in a better position to
optimize your writing time, argue for important book features, and produce a
better, sellable product.

----

Do not sign the contract that the publisher puts in front of you.  They write
the contract for themselves (this is a general rule of contract-writing, BTW).
They make you sign away your firstborn child, pay you royalties that scale
with book sales, etc.  DON'T DO IT.  Just act confident and knowledgeable and
they will cross out obnoxious parts of the contract, like the option on your
next book.  If they forget to cross it out, cross it out and initial it
yourself when you send it back.  That is a counteroffer; if they sign, they
have agreed to your terms.  If they are not willing to, well, there are
numerous publishers in the field :-).

They will also negotiate on percentages.  A lot of screw-you contracts give
you 8.5% on the first 5,000 copies, 10% on the next 5,000, then 15% on the
rest.  I got a straight 15% on two of my books, with various other provisions
for things like translations into foreign languages.  Scaling royalties make a
sick intuitive sense to the hapless author, since it appears that the
publisher is minimizing the risk they are undertaking by publishing your book,
i.e.  the publisher can "afford" to pay you the higher royalties once you have
sold enough books.  This is horsepucky.  The publisher is undertaking a
significant risk by publishing your book at all, it probably costs more than
$100k for them to bring it to market, and screwing you on the percentages is
just some profit for them.  They should be willing to forego the scaling
royalties; if not, try taking the idea to another publisher.

The percentages paid are on the money paid to the publisher for the book
(about half the cover price).  If your book has a cover price of $40 and you
are paid a 15% royalty, you make about $3 per book sold.  For my books I was
paid $10k in advance, so the break-even was a couple thousand books.

BTW, you have to pay estimated taxes on this income on a quarterly basis.
The IRS gets really pissed off if you just pay them a big chunk of change in
April.  Just something budding authors should keep in mind :-).

Another BTW:  agents are a waste of money for this small stuff.  Don't bother.
In contrast to fiction, agents are unneeded in technical publishing because
there are so few viable authors (relatively speaking).  Not as many "talented
amateurs" :-).

----

I found a lawyer who claimed to have experience with publisher contracts.
His responses to my questions were a bit surprising to me, but also seemed
reasonable once he explained the ideas behind the contract.

The basic premise behind these contracts is that they are a partnership
between the author an the publisher.  It is to their advantage to have a good
relationship with the author (it means real dollars to them).

He also mentioned that publishers often consider their contracts as
proprietary information and they should be treated as confidential
information.

He also mentioned that the biggest area of risk for an author of a technical
book was not from copyright violations or unscrupulous publishers but from
your current employer.  He said that you should be very, very careful to make
sure that you employer would have no case against you by making sure not to
use any work equipment, time, or information in the development of a technical
book.  It might also be a good idea to get explicit permission (a memo or
letter) if you feel that there might be a problem otherwise.

----

I signed (unfortunately) the standard first time author contract with the
publisher.  Which means they have both the rights to the next edition of this
book and right-of-first-refusal on my next book (that is assuming I feel like
going through this kind of slavery again, which being the troll that I am means
probably - as long as I can find a topic I think I have something to say
about).  I kinda find these rights more onerous than royalties, since I have
been less than happy with the publisher.

----

A contract is a contract.  Both parties look out only for their own best
interest.  If you want to make sure that you're getting a fair/good deal, get
a lawyer; if you really want to be sure, get a GOOD lawyer.  If you're an
inexperienced (meaning unpublished) author, you don't have much negotiating
pull, so negotiate gently and/or carefully.  Ask lots of questions.  It never
hurts when negotiating to ask for a better deal, and ask why the deal isn't
better.

----

The single most important thing to remember when negotiating a book contract
is that you are not dealing with a company.  Nobody deals with companies -
they are a legal abstraction.  You always, and only, deal with individuals.
This may sound obvious, but consider the ramifications.  No contract can cover
every aspect of book production and distribution - it would be thicker than
the phone book if it tried.  So you must rely on the integrity, honesty, and
taste of the publisher and the people who work there to respect your work and
treat it the way you want it to be treated.  You must trust your baby to their
hands.  If you disagree, they hold the cards, and they'll do what they think
best.  This will usually be what is best for them, and their catalog, and not
what's best for you or your book.  Protect yourself by picking people
carefully.

This leads to the natural tension between a large publisher and a small one.
A large publisher can offer you more of everything:  a bigger advance, more
production money, more advertising, better distribution.  Remember that they
can offer you this, but they don't have to deliver - they will only put
resources into a project if they feel confident those resources will repay
them.  Your book might get lots of attention in January, and be an orphan in
March.  You are a small wheel in a big machine.  A small publisher can offer
you personal assistance and dedicated service.  They can actually help you
think about your book before and during writing.  They can work with you to
direct it, tune it, and steer it to where it represents your very best work.
They will offer you the opportunity to be closely involved in all aspects of
production and marketing.

Which way you go depends both on your style and the type of book you're
writing.  If it's a mass-market book, then you probably will be fine with a
big, impersonal house that will take your manuscript, chug it through the
machine, and then sell it as far and wide as possible.  If you're writing
something that is less general, and you care deeply about it, then a small
house is your best bet for preserving what's special in your book.  If your
work is between these extremes, you should sound out both big and small
publishers.

One more point is to consider is that although you work with people, you sign
with a house.  If you sign a contract and the people at the company change,
and your friendly supporters are replaced by idiots, you're stuck with the
idiots, who can transform your work significantly on its way to the press, in
ways that could never be spelled out in a contract.  Again you're back to
trust.  Large publishers are like any large company:  they lay off people,
promote them, move them around, and hire new people.  Small publishers are
personal and intimate:  the boss picks a few people who share his or her
sensibilities, and the people involved tend to be very stable.

As an example of some of the many issues involved, let's work outside-in,
beginning with the cover.

Consider who controls the cover, finish, binding, jacket, images, and copy.
Is your book softcover or hardback?  Perfect-bound?  Stitched in signatures or
glued to a cardboard backing?  Is there a dust jacket?  If so, is the title
(and author) embossed into the cover for when the jacket is inevitably ripped
or lost?  If not, what kind of cover will it be?  What kind of finish?  Who
selects the images for the front cover, approves the text, and the layout?
Who writes the back-cover copy?  Will the back cover be used to promote your
book or books, or other books in that publisher's catalog?  Will it have a
biography of you?  Will the book have to "look" like other books in the
publisher's catalog?  If you care about how your book looks, you'll want to
have some kind of control.

Who writes the index?  If it's you, what kind of format does it have to be in?
(Have you considered just how bloody hard it is to write a good index?  It is
very tough - boring, tedious, detail-oriented work).  If someone else prepares
the index, who pays them?  Who chooses the indexer?  Who does the
illustrations and figures?  Can you get them redrawn if the versions they
prepare are no good?  Who makes the judgement call?

Who does the layout?  What font?  What's the leading and spacing, how large
are the margins, what runs on the headers and footers?  Is math handled in a
special way?  How about code fragments?  Are index items in bold?  Or maybe
glossary entries instead?  What kind of paper is used?  How thick is it?  What
color?  Is it shiny or dull?  How opaque is the ink?  Does it bleed through
the page?  Is the paper acid-free?

And the list goes on, endlessly.  Every book has numerous nuances and special
details that are unique with respect to all other books.  How they are handled
will in large part determine how happy you are with the result.  Your job is
to write the manuscript and create (or sketch) the figures.  Their job is
everything else.  By the time you finish writing your book, you'll think of it
as your baby.  You wouldn't just hand your baby to anyone to raise for you -
you'd pick your child's guardians very, very carefully.  Do the same with your
publisher.  Find someone you trust.  The key words here are trust, ethics, and
experience.  All publishers know how to contract with a printer and how to
market books.  The differences are in how they treat you, treat your
manuscript during production, and care for it after it's finished and in the
market.  You can't put that in a contract.

----

I'm only part way through the process, so I don't know all the ways I might
yet be screwed.  I'm only a couple of weeks from delivering my finished
manuscript (before publisher review), and I haven't gotten any sinking feeling
yet.

When I started, I took my book proposal around to a number of publishers.  I
didn't like trusting the publisher's volume estimates to decide for myself
whether writing the book would be profitable or not.  Since I have no way to
judge volume on my own, I used the advance amount to judge the publisher's
sincerity.  Signing the contract was delayed over six months from first
contacting publishers because it took that long to get an agreement that
seemed to make business sense.  Of the two publishers that were willing to
give a reasonable advance, I picked the one that obviously had the larger
marketing clout, since my book is for a wider audience, and a good marketing
campaign should be real important to sales.

The total pre-paid royalty amount (the amount I get even if they never sell a
single copy) is $22,000, which is based on about 10,000 books (paid to my
company, not me.  That gets around the tax problems).  That's enough money
that I won't lose my shirt if that's all they sell.  So far I've spent about
two man-months on the book, spread out over the last year.  I can easily see
where my total effort could reach three man-months.  That means I would need
to see a little over 13K books sold to declare it a gainful way to have spent
my time.  I do mostly consulting, and writing a book supposedly helps
business.  However, I have no way to quantify that, so I just look at the book
on its own.

The royalty amount is 15% of what the publisher gets.  I checked, and that's
pretty standard, unless you're Steven King or someone like that.  Being a
first time author, I didn't think there was any leverage to get more, besides,
it seemed they were being reasonably straight with me.  The publisher once
mentioned that they could give me 18% on anything beyond about 18K books (I
don't remember the exact figure) in an effort to entice me.  They tried to
forget about that later, but I wouldn't let them.  Of course, who knows if
we'll ever get to 18K books.  I'm certainly not counting on it.

There has been one hitch so far.  The publisher originally was willing to give
me the advance up front.  Obviously that would be best for me economically,
but I just felt uncomfortable getting a large sum of money before having
actually done anything.  I would be liable to give it back if something went
wrong.  Instead, I suggested that they pay me for reaching certain milestones.
We finally agreed on what I'd get paid for delivering chunks of chapters.
Unfortunately after the contract was signed and just as I was ready so send
them my first milestone, the editor I was working with and had negotiated the
contract with left.  I hadn't noticed or understood the significance of the
word "accepted" relating to my the milestone releases so that I would get
paid.  The assistant (the editor had left) sent the milestone stuff out for
formal review.  This stuff was real rough.  I knew I wasn't finished with it.
I was just making one rough pass through the book.  Of course, the reviewers
complained about lots of stuff.  (I also wasn't real happy that people outside
the publisher got to see the rough form.  Worse, I'll never even know who they
were).  The assistant then took that to the lawyers who said they weren't
accepting the milestone chapters, and refused to pay.  What a hassle.  They
finally hired a new editor who has been trying to get me paid, but it looks
like I'll get the first two milestone payments only a month before the rest of
the money.

So, as far as advice to budding authors?  Since I haven't completed the
process, I'm hesitant to say much of anything.  However, I did find huge
variations in the reactions to the book proposal from publisher to publisher.
Some turned it down flat, while their direct competitors really wanted it (and
were willing to say it in dollars).  So I guess the moral is shop around.
Since my book is related to computer graphics, I contacted every publisher
that showed up at SIGGRAPH, plus a few others that looked like plausible
candidates.  I think that came out to 8-10 publishers.  Of those, one never
even replied, and three more outright refused to pay any advance.  Eventually
two were really interested.

----

I have written two books with two different publishers, the first only
published in hardback, the second printed in hardback and simultaneously in
paperback.  On the first book I received 10%; on the second I received 15% on
the hard-cover version and 10% on the paper version.  On neither book did I
negotiate the contract with the publisher:  I simply signed what they placed
in front of me.  I only insisted that the paperback be cheap, and they
complied.  On neither book did I receive any advance or expense money.  For
both books I prepared my own index, and I strongly recommend that authors do
this themselves, as only the author can do a really good job.

Both of my books were typeset by the publisher.  Although typesetting your own
book is a tremendous effort, I would recommend it, as the effort of ferreting
out the errors the typesetters introduce eventually exceeds that of doing it
yourself.

My first book had a uninterested editor; my second has a superb editor.  This
makes more difference than you might initially think, even well after the book
is published.  I recommend asking a potential editor to give you the names of
authors of books she or he has edited, and contacting those authors.  In my
experience, the editor is more important than the publisher.

----

Probably the biggest decision to make is whether to write a book at all.  It
is a BIG time sink, bigger than you think.  If you are planning on making a
LOT of money on a technical book, forget it.  You will make some, but not a
LOT (unless you write a textbook that becomes a standard).  That said, making
a good arrangement with a publisher is important, if only for your own sanity,
and to make sure you get your share.

The way I figure it, the relationship is quite clear.  I want to create the
best book possible, they want to make a lot of money.  In general, they only
care about quality in so much as it helps sell books.  Understanding this
helps.  This should help you realize that whatever contract they first put
under your nose is heavily tilted in their favor.  Unless you love everything
it says, change it.

In my case, I got 15% of the first 3000 copies, 17% (3000-5000), and 20% after
that.  This is higher than first offered but not by much.  I delivered camera
ready postscript (including index) and got $3000 extra for the pain (and I
mean pain) of doing this.

If you are concerned about quality and, for example, want a right of rejection
on how the cover looks, say so in writing up front.

I also got shocked when they decided to release the book on CD ROM, and found
out I had signed all my rights away to this.  They apparently did not owe me
one cent of royalties for the CD sales.  They did me a "favor" and finally
agreed to 5%.

The bottom line is that I am not pissed about the arrangements.  I had full
control of content, and it was my fault I did not read the contract well about
the CD royalties.  Read the contract carefully, edit it at will, and then
write a good book and feel lucky for every penny you get for having the
opportunity to tell the world what you know.

----

My experience with my publisher has been reasonably good.  My royalty rates
are 12% for the first 2500 book, 15% for the next 5000, and 18% thereafter.
I thought that was reasonable and competitive with rates I heard from other
publishers and authors.

I think it is a good idea to establish price and distribution policy in
advance.  Not having done so, I had an initial problem with the price of my
book.  At first, the publisher set a price that was, in my opinion,
outrageous.  Their price was so high that only libraries would have been able
to afford it.  You don't have to have an MBA to figure out that overall sales
(and profits) might increase if the book could be made affordable to the
masses.  Anyway, with much haggling in the first month or two, the price
dropped dramatically.

I handed the publisher a camera-ready manuscript.  Although they could have
assisted me on that, I found the do-it-yourself approach to be less
error-prone.  Furthermore, there is some time saved in not having to review
anyone else's typesetting/editing work but your own.  In any case, it can be
used to increase your own royalty rate because you can make the case that
their costs are lowered by your own typesetting work.  Most people now write
publications with latex anyway, so it's not much added effort.

The publisher reimbursed me promptly for my reproduction/copying expenses.
They were also fast in printing the book.  It took less than four months from
the time I gave them the camera-ready copy to the time the book was available
for sale.  Having them meet a Siggraph deadline is good...

----

I have had one small monograph-style book published.  Typesetting & figures
were done by me in Tex/Latex, and I gave the publisher camera-ready pages
printed on a hi res (~1K dpi?) phototypesetter.  (Or did I just preview it on
that, and give the publisher postscript?  I forget now.)  I wrote my own
index, which was in some way the most painful part of the writing.  The
publisher provided some proofreading.  I had no color plates.

My relationship with the publisher was fine.  The only big snag from my view
was the cover:  I didn't pursue my ideas actively and in the meantime they
made up some cover art which was in my opinion very inappropriate (analogous
to a picture of a steak on the cover of a vegetarian cookbook).  They claimed
it was highly visible so would attract buyers and that they knew more about
this sort of thing so I shouldn't argue.  I got a vague feeling that since
they had already spent money on the artwork and didn't want to toss it.  I
convinced them to take out the part that I found objectionable (the "steak").
The result is a cover that I find unattractive but harmless.  Morals:  (a) if
you care about the cover, make sure to insist on control up front; (b) if you
think you don't care about the cover, think again, because there's no telling
what monstrosities the publisher might come up with.

Contractwise, their initial offer me was 5%.  I balked and they came back with
5% for the first X copies sliding up to 10% for Y or more copies.  I took this
to mean that they expected to sell X+epsilon copies, and accepted.  The book
is a small enough thing that frankly, it didn't make much difference; the book
wasn't written in order to make money.  Even if they gave me 50%, it wouldn't
make my fortune, nor even be a reasonable hourly wage for the time put in.

----

I negotiated a sliding scale royalty at roughly 10%/20%.  If you've already
worked with a publisher, you get a bit more room in the negotiation and you
can get them to really talk about costs and risks (I did not do so well on my
first book).  Also, if you are confident about the sales of your work you can
often give up just a little on the first bit and get quite a bit on the
back-end of the run.

As far as production - face it, much of the stuff we publish has a very
limited life because of how fast all the tools around us are changing.  The
key for us was to get from the copy we gave to the publisher to an
on-the-shelf book as quickly as possible (ours was about 6 weeks).  To get
this to happen, you (the author) need to provide camera-ready copy to the
publisher including index.  We did all of this on Word, and had a local
typesetting house run the final copy on a high-res laser printing device (used
to always be a lineotronic but there are a bunch of better high-res printers
now).  We also supplied cover art (in electronic form).  The key here is to
have an ongoing relationship with the publisher - have the publisher's
production people review your templates EARLY in the process, get complex art
or color art to them early, and run EARLY production tests through your
typesetter - particularly to test fonts, figure line weights, and shading
(things that come out of the hi-res typesetter are way different than what you
see on the screen, and your publishers production people can tell you a lot
about the differences there will be between the hi-res output and the final
printed work).  If you do go the camera-ready route, negotiate a rate for your
production (we did a per-page) from your publisher - you are saving them lots
of time and money by doing the production.  Lastly, don't underestimate the
headache of producing your own camera ready - it's long, hard, and you have to
get it right - but in the end, you get your book looking the way you want and
the publisher's production time is vastly reduced.

----

I signed the standard contract straight away.  I'm not sorry about that,
despite the other guy's comments; I still feel like they've been relatively
fair on money issues.  I got a little less than 10 grand to write it, and the
sliding scale royalty thing that works out to about two bucks a book.  New
authors should remember that the percentage quoted is based on the wholesale
price of the book.  The only money thing that I thought was bit of a drag was
the "reserve" clause:  they keep 25% of ALL of the royalties just in case they
get returns.  Of course 25% is always much higher than the actual return rate,
so perhaps 1/4 of all the money you would have got sits in an account until
the book is discontinued and closed out.  Sounds like that'll be about 2 or 3
years.

The publisher will want the book IMMEDIATELY after you have signed the
contract.  They feel like they paid for it, and "where is it?"  Therefore, if
you feel strongly about a project, complete it, and then approach the
publisher.  If you are good at desk top publishing, you can negotiate a far
higher royalty for delivering a book that needs only to be printed and sold.
In my case, the publisher wanted a book for which they had little more than a
concept.  I was late from the beginning, and it added to the stress and made
it hard to keep the quality up.

As many authors say, it's more fun to 'have written' than it is to write.  I
still would do it again, except for one thing - it takes all your time to do
it right.  It'd kill my business to take the 3-5 month hiatus required to do a
full book.  That brings all my sales momentum and networking results to a
complete halt, and for months after the book is done you have to get all that
going again.  If you do the math, there isn't enough money in it as it stands
(even taking into account a better contract per your previous author's tips).
And you really can't just write a book as you find time:  When you write books
about software, time is critical - if you take too much time to finish, the
next release of that software will make your manuscript obsolete before it
hits the stores.  Besides, I don't know if I (or many other authors) would
really make a lot of progress without some sort of real deadline...

----

A certain small publisher seemed quite interested in seeking me out to write a
book, an opportunity I never thought would just drop in my lap.  Since I had
never published anything before, their royalty percentage (under 8%) and
advance (<$3,000) was a little low, but I was getting a chance to publish a
book, so I didn't mind.  I changed a couple things on the initial contract,
but nothing major.

Their word processing templates were not completely thought out and after they
found a few problems in them, they asked me to redo a couple of chapters with
the new styles.  This was not too difficult, but it did give me a queasy
feeling about their ad hoc in-house editing environment.  I was also surprised
to find that, even though we used e-mail extensively to ship chapters,
illustrations, and programs, they also insisted that all revisions be done
only on paper printouts, instead of using change bars or colored text in the
document files.  This meant that I not only e-mailed the chapters, but we were
also FedExing bulky packages of paper, just like 100 years ago.

The editor at one point undercounted the pages in the book, and advised me to
go into more detail to fill out the book, even though my calculations said I
was right on.  I did as I was told, and later the editor sheepishly admitted
he forgot to add illustration space.  Now that we were way over, he asked if I
could cut some chapters way back.  I stood my ground on this, saying it was
impractical at this late date while still meeting the deadline...  the
publisher graciously ate it, publishing a book that was 50% bigger than
designed, for the same price.

The project also included a CD-ROM full of programs, data and information,
which the publisher and I jointly designed.  They also contracted several
other people to add large chunks of content, and although it was a lot of
additional work for me, it went quite smoothly.

They had a technical editor go over the book, and he came back with one
change...  now that I've tech-edited another computer book, I am very
unimpressed with his (lack of) work.  They also contracted an outside Content
Editor who was incredible, very thorough and she practically read my mind when
suggesting changes that fit my style.

As is the hallmark of this publisher, the final design and layout of the book
was quite beautiful and I was very proud of the way it turned out.  Now, I
will never again attempt writing a book on the side while juggling a full-time
job, pregnant wife, and major house remodeling all at once...  and I will
certainly ask for more money next time.  However, I am convinced that this
writing/publishing experience turned out to be positive for two main reasons:
(1) The small publisher was very interested in keeping me happy for future
work, and (2) I was interested in publishing a book, not making money.

----

My first book experience was very enlightening and MUCH MUCH more work than I
ever imagined.  My experience with the publisher was not as bad as some of the
other responses to this inquiry.  The royalty rate I negotiated was 12% for
the first 3000 books, 15% thereafter.  The major mistake I made was in
agreeing to format the text into almost camera-ready copy using LaTeX macros
supplied by the publisher.  I received a fee of $2000 for this.  It was not
worth the money.  The macros were not complete, and I would never agree to
this again.  There are 3 other pieces of advice that I have:

1) Make sure you know where and how often the book will be advertised.  In the
end, this is the main function of the publishing company.  They contract out
the printing.  I was somewhat disappointed in the few ads that I saw for the
book.

2) If you work with co-authors, make sure you know how reliable they are and
be ready for major work if you are acting as the editor for the project.

3) Double or triple your initial estimate of the effort for the project.
Writing is only a small portion of the job.  Editing, organizing, indexing,
formatting, etc. takes up a large amount of time.

----

For about a year now publishers of every kind have been making attempts to
grab all rights from authors.  The New York Times is one of the sorrier
examples - for years and years, the Times' practice was to buy one-time rights
to freelance articles.  Suddenly last year they announced a new policy of
demanding all rights.  It's ignited protests across the writing community and
many writers are refusing to write for the Times.  The reason this is a
problem is that you just don't get paid enough for one newspaper article to be
able to make a living writing them.  The writer's solution has always been to
re-sell in non-competing markets.  Due to the electronic world's sudden
imposition of deathless databases, repeat downloads, etc., publishers are now
seeing opportunities to sell the same article over and over, whereas before
they could only sell it once when the paper was published.  For some reason,
many publishers seem to feel that the writers don't deserve any part of the
profits.  This war has been going on for a year; it will continue.  The NWU
and ASJA have brought suits against some publishers; but the real war (as in
all wars) is being fought by the infantry on the ground:  the individual
writer negotiating with the publisher.  It's hard telling the editor of a
big-time publication that you aren't going to accept their contract.  The
better-paying ones, where you're making thousands of dollars per article, are
also the ones that have the worst contracts in terms of rights.

As far as rights go:  rights can be split down to the quark level.  You name
it; there is a right for it.  For example, I retained movie rights to my book.
It is unlikely that anything will come of that, but I retained them.  It is
possible a documentary could be made, you see, and then I would own those
rights.  My publisher is now into CD-ROM publication, so they adamantly
refused to allow me to keep those rights.  Then there are plain electronic
rights:  databases, posting articles on Usenet.  Facts aren't copyrightable,
of course:  arrangement of words IS copyrightable, in fact, is the main thing
you copyright.  A posting on Usenet is copyrighted.  E-mail is copyrighted.
If there was a means to present information using aluminum foil and earphones,
that would be copyrightable.

My point is that writers better pay attention to all the media in existence
when reviewing contracts.  If the future is in electronic media, then it's
important not to sign away all your rights to that future.

----

Some advice for authors?  I thought about this for a while, and decided that I
have neither damnation nor praise for my publisher.  They sent me a reasonable
contract, I signed it and sent them a manuscript, and they published it.  End
of story.

My advice is more personal.  Writing a 500-page technical book is an activity
that should come with a Surgeon-General's warning:  "May cause serious health
problems."  Take good care of yourself as you burn the midnight oil.

Be forewarned that writing a good technical book is an all-consuming task.
It will take over your life from the day you write those first few
introductory words to the day you sign off on the final copyedited manuscript.
It may be fairly described as inhumane (albeit self-inflicted) torture.

There will be days of absolute despair and frustration.  You will want to
cleave your computer with a large and heavy fire axe.  (Be sure to make a
backup first, and remember to disconnect the power.)  Your family and friends
may post "Warning:  Vicious Dog" signs in your immediate vicinity.

But there will come -- eventually -- two days that you will savor for years
afterwards.  On the first occasion, your editor will send you a copy of your
book, hot off the press.  This is a wonderful experience.

On the second occasion, you will see your book proudly sitting on the shelf in
a bookstore.  This is ...  well, check with your doctor first.  The heart can
only take so much adrenalin.  (And rest assured that your eyes do not deceive
you; your book will indeed glow with its inner radiance.)

Writing a good technical book is hard work, and you will be fortunate indeed
if it sells more than a few thousand copies.  (Unless, of course, it has the
words "sex" or "dummies" in the title.  Unfortunately, Dr. Ruth and IDG Books
have already laid claim to "Sex for Dummies.")

It used to be said that the ability to make tools separated us humans from the
"lower" animals.  Today, I think that it is our innate desire to write books.
But then, what other primate would be stupid enough to want to?

----

Problem:  Publishing companies get bought-out and merged regularly.  People in
them shift around as well.  With publisher X my book was translated into
German without my knowledge.  I learned about it on the net when someone
emailed me a question about it.  I actually ordered copies of my book from a
German bookstore I found on the net.  The bookstore gave me the email of the
German publisher, I contacted him, and he told me that one of my other books
had been translated too.  Publisher X was bought out by Publisher Y, then by
Publisher Z - when I contacted Publisher Z, there was confusion as to what had
been done before the chain of buyouts.  Publisher Z (in that they bought out
Publisher X) assumed responsibility for Publisher X's actions, so they came
clean, and I got my royalties.  I would have never known about the translation
if someone had not emailed a question starting "I like you German translation
of ..."  - I said "what German translation???"

A similar event occurred when I learned about a CD ROM that my book was to be
included on.  I found this information in a netnews newsgroup.  This did
appear on my next royalty statement, but I found it awkward to read about it
before being informed of it from my publisher.

----

random notes:

I can get up to 20% royalties from my publishers, 12-15% for the first 2500
copies, 20% after 5k-10k copies...usually with around $8k advance 50%
front-loaded with a $2k grant for work-for-hires (helpers) and a $2k grant for
formatting...7500 books is what they expect to sell if technical w/program
source code...I usually sell in the 15k-60k copies range...they will let you
promote your business in a book...

First book...try for 12% royalties up to $5k copies, 15-18% thereafter...try
to get 50% advance up-front, no less than 33%...

Beware subsidiary rights clauses that allow them to take major portions of
your book and place them in other books for a nominal fee...I have not been
caught here, but I know someone who wrote an extremely successful internet
book who did lose by this clause...

Most publishers are relaxed if you are just a little late, they all get up
tight (and rightly so) if you are much late...some publishers are extremely
serious about deadlines and cost overruns...they are in publishing to turn
books and money - so take their contracts very seriously, they WILL enforce
what's in them...

Be aware of the discounting schedules of the day...breaks around 55%/56% are
important, as these are likely to be where a publisher says you get 1/2 your
royalty rate...know the industry standard at the time...

Publisher X has good distribution, but you are not likely to see a lot of the
money made...Publisher Y's distribution is lame, because they don't have
people hitting the streets reselling to stores that have sold out, so a book
store or chain might place only one order (got to have those sales guys out
there pushing more product through the distribution channels!); Publisher Z
takes an aggressive approach with marketing and distribution, taking advantage
of modern electronic means (internet, cds, etc.), but I don't have conclusive
data on them yet...looks good so far, as far as getting them to make many
press releases (very important for book/software sales)...

In parts of contracts where they say "these sales will not increase the book
count used to determine royalty rate" - you can usually talk them into
counting 1/2 the rate (i.e. the sale of 2 books counts as 1 against the total
needed to increase your royalty rate from 12% to 15% at 4000 copies, for
example)...

----

The battle between publisher and author is eternal, and unlikely to be
resolved.  But book publishers particularly (over software publishers) seem
bent on exploitation.  It is really just a supply and demand issue, I think,
so hating the publishers is probably not healthy:  just fight back.  Remember:
it is just business.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
END OF RTNEWS
